[Music]
all right I promised you last week I
would tell you all about the current
crisis in cosmology and I'm not kidding
when i use the word crisis crisis in
this respect it's totally justified but
before we get to that let's have a look
at what's gonna be in the night sky to
look out for this month so on November
22nd to 25th the moon is gonna be
getting progressively smaller so going
from a very large president to a very
thin Crescent it gets towards new the
thing is every night it will look lower
and lower in the sky at the same time so
if you go out and look at 7 o'clock on
the 22nd and the next night at 7 o'clock
it will be slightly lower and also
slightly smaller and as it gets lower
and smaller on each night from the 22nd
for 25th it's gonna actually get closer
to a different object in the sky the
three brightest things that are in the
eastern sky at the moment it's on their
23rd it will be close to Spiker which is
the brightest star in the constellation
of Virgo and then by the 24th it will be
closest to Mars then on the 25th it's
gonna be close to mercury very very low
on the horizon just before it becomes a
new moon so it's a very very thin
Crescent so it'll be a good way to find
mercury if you want to try and spot it
it's a little bit difficult because it's
so close to the horizon into the Sun on
November 24th as well we have a Venus
and Jupiter conjunction this time in the
evening sky so about an hour so after
sunset look out for Venus which will be
incredibly bright and then Jupiter
probably the next brightest thing in the
sky in the southwest Venus is gonna be
about a degree and a half below Jupiter
so about three sort of thumb widths down
from Jupiter Saturn is also gonna be
above them sort of along the ecliptic as
well and then when the moon comes out of
its new moon phase moon is actually
going to swing past Venus Jupiter and
Saturn on the 28th 29th and 30th of
November so look out for that as well we
had a Venus and Jupiter conjunction
earlier in a year back in January but
it's also quite close to the moon but
the next one
isn't actually gonna be until February
2021 we don't have one next year at all
so get you fill of this conjunction
while you can sit gonna be a really
pretty sight in this guy then by
December 10th Venus is actually gonna be
much closer to Saturn in the sky this
time about 1.8 degrees south of Saturn
so maybe almost 4 thumb widths away but
it's a really good way of finding satin
because satin is nowhere near as bright
as Venus or Jupiter it can be very
easily confused for a star so again an
hour or so after sunset look for Venus
and you should be able to find Saturn as
well then on December 13 14 15 this is
the peak of the Geminids meteor shower
and I see on this channel a lot you know
be wearing that the media will report on
a meteor shower and say that one is
coming and you should go look out but in
reality you know there's not gonna be
that many meteors probably hard to spot
not true of this or if you get chance
you need to get outside to try and spot
some meteors because the Geminids is one
of the highlights of the year you can
get up to a hundred meteors an hour or
so that's more than one a minute and of
course a lot of those all be quite faint
and so you won't always spot all of
those but so you have a very very good
chance of spotting them the Geminids
meteor shower means the radiant eye the
point where all the meteors look to be
coming from is in Gemini which is quite
close to a Ryan in the sky so the best
thing to do is to look for Orion and
then turn away from Orion prints on the
back of your head to it and then look at
the rest of the sky because then the
rest of the meteors should then shoot
out and over your head and that'll be
the best way of spotting them remember
though December at least in the northern
hemisphere here it's no record
so please wrap up warm if you are going
outside because standing around or lying
down in the cold obviously get much
colder than if you're moving around so
please take precautions when you're
trying to spot these things but remember
if you get pictures please send them to
me on social media because maybe eat
your shower pictures are my favourites
alright so with that out of the way
let's turn to Astro news that we need to
catch up with from the past month
including that crisis in cosmology
okay before we get to that crisis you
know me I love black holes so the first
piece of news that I want to talk about
is that the smallest black hole we've
ever found has been discovered now I
guess the question that everyone always
asks is what's the biggest black hole
you know because we're always bothered
about the biggest and most energetic
things and we never really stop to think
about necessarily what the smallest
black hole is and why that actually
might tell us a lot about how black
holes are formed so when massive stars
run out of fuel to fuse together in
nuclear fusion and I mean you know run
out of hydrogen and they start burning
helium and all the way up to carbon
oxygen nitrogen all the way to iron
weapons in a supernova when all of that
fuel runs out is that essentially
there's no energy pushing outwards to
counteract the pull of gravity inwards
and so in a normal supernova what
happens is that everything collapses
inwards but eventually it reaches the
point where the core of the star is held
up by atomic forces and so a supernova
is essentially the point at which the
outer layers of the star rebound off
that core due to the atomic forces and
then that's why we get these these huge
big nebulae forming where the outer
layers have been thrown out and you've
been left with something like a white
dwarf which has held up by the pressure
between electrons or a neutron star
which is held up by the pressure between
neutrons if you have a star that's
incredibly massive then the force
between the atomic particles in that
central core sometimes are large enough
to counteract that push of gravity
inwards and what happens in that case is
the whole thing collapses down to a
black hole ie the mass is all
concentrated at a single point a
singularity and the speed at which you
would need to escape that gravitational
potential well is greater than the speed
of light but we don't really know the
point at which for a star it becomes so
massive that it will become a black hole
at the end of its life we don't know
what that sort of cut off mass
is so by searching for the smallest mass
black holes and also the biggest neutron
stars we can try and pinpoint that so
some of you might remember two months
ago in a previous night's going to news
I talked about the fact that they had
found the largest neutron star ever at
something like two point zero four times
the mass of the Sun and the theorized
limit from LIGO the gravitational wave
detector was two point one seven times
the mass of the Sun so within error it
was actually a pretty good fit to that
best estimate at best model that LIGO
came up with now this black hole they
found is 3.3 times the mass of the Sun
which means it's still in agreement with
that best model that we currently have a
LIGO of saying that threshold is about
sort of two point one seven times the
mass of the Sun this black hole though
is only twelve miles across the event
horizon of the black hole is only twelve
miles across having three point three
times the mass the Sun it which is kind
of incredible nothing to panic about
because it's ten thousand light years or
so away at the edge of the Milky Way and
the reason they've been able to find it
is because it's been in a binary system
with a white dwarf star one of these
stars that has been left over from a
supernova and it's held up by the
pressure between electrons and the thing
is with that white dwarf because it's
orbiting a black hole and the black hole
is orbiting it it obviously has a very
weird pattern of movement on the sky it
sort of wobbles a lot and so by studying
that white dwarfs wobble they've been
able to infer the presence of a black
hole by sort of you know using just
orbital mechanics math to determine how
big the thing it's orbiting is and of
course they couldn't see another star
there so when the math popped out this
huge mass and they can't see anything
it's clearly very obvious that the thing
it's orbiting is a black hole so this
result is really exciting not just to be
able to find a black hole in that way
but also to keep thinking about this
threshold at which stars can collapse
down and become a neutron star or become
a black hole instead because it could be
that all supermassive black holes in the
universe there are millions to billions
of times the mass of the Sun all started
from this initial collapse of a star
down to three ish times the mass of the
Sun black hole and have grown from there
so to understand the biggest things we
also need to understand the smallest
things speaking of the end of a star's
life so the first stage of the end of a
star's life is it running out of
hydrogen to burn in the region that it's
hot enough in its core when that happens
the star contracts ever so slightly
because the energies all of a sudden run
out and gravity starts to take hold but
when that happens it then becomes hot
enough in a very small shell around the
outside of the core just kickstart
hydrogen burning again into helium when
that starts there's a sort of big kick
out of energy and it causes the outer
layers of the star to expand to absorb
the huge amounts of energy and heat
given off by the burning of hydrogen and
helium in that shell around the core and
these layers when I say they expand
outwards they expand outwards so this
process is probably going to happen to
our Sun in about four-and-a-half billion
years or so so now it's panic and it
could engulf all the way past Earth and
all the way to the orbit of Mars so the
size of the star really does just go up
by over an order of magnitude and the
question is when that happens to a star
what happens to those planets around it
that are engulfed in those outer layers
of the star which essentially is like a
plasma you know which is kind of gasp
where all the electrons are free to roam
around so it's like a charged gas it
behaves in slightly different ways to a
gas but it's essentially what you can
think of it as is an incredibly
energetic hot not exactly very dense gas
that these planets are going to be
completely engulfed in so what will
happen to you know the structure of the
planet will it maintain its like what
like structure or will it be completely
broken down like melted like what will
actually happen because the temperatures
in these red giant star envelopes as we
call them are in the thousands of Kelvin
so this question was highlighted again
this month when a paper was published by
Ken Ponte and collaborators using data
from test the transiting exoplanets
satellite test has to be very very good
at detecting small changes in brightness
of stars because that's how it detects
planets it detects when a planet passes
in front of a star and causes the dip in
the star's brightness as it blocks out
some of the light so it is very very
precise and detecting those changes in
brightness that means that what it can
also do is something called Astro
seismology which is essentially looking
at the pulsations over stars brightness
as it goes through these different
phases of hydrogen and helium burning as
gravity makes it contract and then pulse
back outwards as it gets an extra kick
from fusion starting in some little
shell around the inner core so by using
tests can Ponte and collaborators manage
to study a red giant star that had
already been discovered but the very
specific pulsations of it allowing them
to pinpoint at what stage in its
lifetime was it a red giant star and
therefore how massive should it be so
this star was called HD two zero three
nine four nine and so they managed to
measure a mass of it of 1.2 3 plus or
minus like 0.15 solar masses so 1.2 3
times the mass of the Sun the thing is
when this red giant star was first
discovered and it sort of announced in a
discovery paper to say we found another
red giant star the mass that they quoted
then a couple of years ago was 2 times
the mass of the Sun plus or minus 0.1
ish masses of the Sun so that's a drop
in about 30% of the star's mass which
could suggest that maybe it sheds some
of its outer layers somewhat in those
intervening years and may be reduced in
mass that would mean it would have
reduced in size as well the interesting
thing they found in this paper though
with Tess is that this red giant star
also has an exoplanet that if you
believe the hypothesis that this star
has sort of shrunk since it was first
characterized that exoplanet should have
been in these outer envelope of the red
giant star when it first swelled up so
it should have been engulfed this planet
and now it no longer is and has clearly
survived that engulfment
and so the question is how in the
universe did that planet survive being
engulfed in thousands of kelvins worth
of energetic plasma now of course there
could be nothing left on the surface of
the planet if it had any liquid on its
water it's probably been completely
boiled off but obviously the rock or the
core of the planet has survived what if
it was something like a gas giant like
Jupiter or Saturn or something and it's
been completely stripped of that outer
gas layer but you've been left behind
with the core and now that's what we're
detecting essentially we don't know we
can speculate all day about what's
happened to this planet and so the
authors of this paper have said more
study on this system this red giant star
and this planet is going to be needed in
order to understand whether it was
engulfed or whether perhaps our model of
the star is not quite right about what's
going on and what happened in its
lifetime and we need to figure that out
so future work needed so yes we found
the smallest black hole and yes we don't
understand this strange acts upon it but
there is a crisis in cosmology and this
was the subtitle of a paper that came
out this month by D Valentino melchiorri
and silk they essentially said Planck
evidence for a closed universe and a
possible crisis for cosmology okay so
maybe they clarified with possible
because they were hedging their bets in
a you know proper scientific publication
but after reading it and after me
explaining what's going on here you
probably agree that this is a crisis so
we've talked a lot on this channel
before about how there is a massive
debate currently raging on the age of
the universe and I will link that video
in a card above so you can go back and
watch it if you like but come back here
afterwards essentially to summarize
there are a couple of different ways
that we can measure the age of the
universe one of the ways is sort of the
original way that Hubble did it back in
the 1920s is we can use what's called a
standard candle something that's the
same brightness wherever it is in the
universe
no matter the distance so that if you
measure its apparent brightness to you
you can work out the distance to that
object once you know the distance to an
object if you have the speed that it's
moving away from you from its redshift
how much it's light is red and by as it
comes to us from the expansion of the
universe you can rewind time and
essentially end up with an age from
distance and speed you know speed equals
distance over time the other big way
that we do this is by looking at the
radiation echo from the Big Bang
something we call the Cosmic Microwave
Background and that's been measured by
satellites such as Kobe W map and most
recently Planck and the way we get an
age out the Cosmic Microwave Background
is to say okay if that's what the Big
Bang gave us then given our best model
of the universe of its structure and its
expansion and its contents then what age
of the universe does that model spit
back out at us and the thing is the ages
of those two different methods have not
agreed for quite a while so the
supernovae and more local measurements
done in different ways give you sort of
14 and a half a billion years whereas
the echo from the Big Bang gives you
more something like 13.7 billion years
and for awhile the errors on those
measurements did overlap so we were
saying okay so it's probably somewhere
in the middle that's why everyone sort
of kind of quotes like 14 billion years
for the age of the universe and given
that error they'll all sort of come out
in the wash and everything will be fine
the thing is we've got better and better
at measuring the ages our telescopes
have got better our software our
instruments I said sure it has all got
more precise and so the errors on those
measurements have build drill down and
drill down until all of a sudden the
errors don't overlap anymore and now
there is actual contention between the
ages being measured locally yes you know
with galaxies quite close to us and
universally with the Cosmic Microwave
Background which is permeating every
direction of the sky that we look in and
is an echo from the Big Bang and as men
lots of different ways that have been
suggested that could reconcile this
problem one of which was that maybe the
expansion universe is different locally
to at great distances but there's not a
lot of evidence
so instead this month these three
cosmologists have reanalyzed this cosmic
microwave background data and allow
different parameters in their model to
vary so one of the things that was
always kept said in the models was the
geometry of the universe this is whether
it's flat open or closed now this has
nothing to do with the end of the
universe being sort of like you know
expansion forever open closed is in a
Big Crunch or flat as in we'll just sort
of regional equilibrium and sort of
stopped expanding this is to do with the
actual geometry of space is space flat
is spaced curves and again I'm not
talking about curvature of space because
of like mass like in Einstein's theory
of general relativity this is like the
physical shape from space in the
universe so when I say that it's flat
what that means is that if I set two
parallel lines going or like two
parallel beams of light they will never
ever converge meet because the space
they're traveling on is flat if
something is closed then that means that
the two parallel lines will eventually
meet which sounds strange but that
happens on the surface of a sphere so at
the equator on earth longitude lines are
parallel to each other but they all meet
at the poles so that is an example of a
closed space it doesn't necessarily mean
that the universe is hysterical as such
but that was what a closed space would
mean the opposite of that is an open
space which is where like two parallel
lines you would completely diverge and
would never ever meet so the sort of
shape that people quote a lot of times
it's like a Pringle shape for an open
universe like a saddle maybe I guess as
well but maybe I'm just got food on the
brain today and so allowing that
parameter to vary from the universe
having to be flat and two parallel lines
never actually converging or diverging
there is evidence that the universe
should actually be closed
ie there are two parallel lines will
eventually meet like on the surface of a
sphere and it's like
okay fine we could probably accept that
our universe has this intrinsic shape to
it but what does allowing that parameter
to vary due to all of the other
parameters in your model of the universe
and first as I was reading this I sort
of got hopeful that it might fix all of
this contention with the age problem but
alas it made it worse
so they show a plot for all the
parameters they derive and one thing it
did fix was the fact that if you look at
on large scales in the Cosmic Microwave
Background and try and derive these
properties and you look at very small
scales and derive these properties you
get very different answers she was again
a weird thing that they were finding but
if you allow the universe to be closed
then those problems go away which is
great right the problem is that when
that problem goes away
the values that you then derive for for
example the age of the universe are even
worse than before so they found an age
of the universe that's about 18 billion
years old which is even more in tension
with the results of supernovae the other
thing that they find is that the
fraction of matter in the universe which
is you know this thing that we always
quote weathers like 75% dark energy 25%
matter of which you know 80 odd percent
of that is dark matter they find that
the fraction of matter in the universe
is closer to 50% than it is to 25% they
don't know whether they are precise or
not or accurate or not any more because
of the discrepancy with so many other
local measurements of the age of the
universe and other properties of the
universe so it really is a crisis
there's two possible explanations for
this crisis the first is that there is
new physics here that we have never
thought of that needs to be explained
and hypothesized and obviously people
would like it to be that because then
there's more to do and there's more to
find out and I'm pretty sure there's
people up and down the country even
around the world right now
writing proposals for a new job or a new
fellowship that's like we need to solve
this problem and come up with all this
new physics
the second option though is that there
is something wrong with the data or with
the analysis of the data for the Cosmic
Microwave Background it's something we
call a systemic something that's there
in the system that's affecting our
results with this data and there are
people that have been searching for
these systematics in this data for a
while now they've just not been able to
find one because obviously the pipeline
to the station is just so much to do
with it and there's so many places there
could be an issue either from the actual
observations or from taking the data
from ours in the data or compiling the
data whatever it might be and so
obviously Noah wants it to be that
because then everything we've done with
it for the past decade or so will have
something wrong with it that's obviously
the less glamorous side of the science
but if there is something in there then
we need to know because anything that's
done now in the future with this data
will have some doubt cast on it because
people will be wondering whether is that
just because of a systematic or
something wrong with the data so I have
to say I'm quite glad I'm not a
cosmologists I'm not someone who studies
the the Big Bang and the evolution of
the universe as a whole I'm someone who
actually focuses on a specific thing in
the universe I focus on supermassive
black holes inside galaxies and the
effect they're having now of course my
work is affected a little bit by
cosmology because everything sort of
feeds into each other
saysay though this problem needs sorting
out and if it does get sorted out then
you can bet that I will be reporting on
it right here for you okay that's the
end of this month
night sky news I hope you enjoyed it
despite me negative that we ended on
there I have a very exciting video
coming for you next week which I am
really looking forward to posting I
always get asked you're a scientist
you're an astrophysicist what do you
actually do
all day so I'm gonna leave it at that
and I will see you in that video next
week I'm filming on a Monday rather than
a Sunday as well so anything Becky won't
be happy because she does not have as
much time to edit this as normal
oops who wrote this paper Tiago come
Monday Monday accompany please don't
um and so using tests come Ponte and
collaborators managed to study the
asteroseismology
Oh doubt hit Richard is now following me
hello I keep catching myself technique
where's my songs it's not quite as
Europe